<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>North of Boston</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="mending-wall" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mending Wall</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Something there is that doesn’t love a wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spills the upper boulders in the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And makes gaps even two can pass abreast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The work of hunters is another thing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have come after them and made repair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they have left not one stone on a stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they would have the rabbit out of hiding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one has seen them made or heard them made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at spring mending-time we find them there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I let my neighbour know beyond the hill;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on a day we meet to walk the line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set the wall between us once again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We keep the wall between us as we go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each the boulders that have fallen to each.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some are loaves and some so nearly balls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have to use a spell to make them balance:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stay where you are until our backs are turned!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wear our fingers rough with handling them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, just another kind of out-door game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One on a side. It comes to little more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There where it is we do not need the wall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is all pine and I am apple orchard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My apple trees will never get across</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eat the cones under his pines, I tell him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He only says, “Good fences make good neighbours.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I could put a notion in his head:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“<em>Why</em> do they make good neighbours? Isn’t it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where there are cows? But here there are no cows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I built a wall I’d ask to know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I was walling in or walling out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to whom I was like to give offence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something there is that doesn’t love a wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wants it down.” I could say “Elves” to him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it’s not elves exactly, and I’d rather</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said it for himself. I see him there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In each hand, like an old-stone savage armed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He moves in darkness as it seems to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of woods only and the shade of trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will not go behind his father’s saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he likes having thought of it so well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He says again, “Good fences make good neighbours.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-death-of-the-hired-man" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Death of the Hired Man</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To meet him in the doorway with the news</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put him on his guard. “Silas is back.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She pushed him outward with her through the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shut it after her. “Be kind,” she said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took the market things from Warren’s arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set them on the porch, then drew him down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sit beside her on the wooden steps.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When was I ever anything but kind to him?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’ll not have the fellow back,” he said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I told him so last haying, didn’t I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘If he left then,’ I said, ‘that ended it.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What good is he? Who else will harbour him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his age for the little he can do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What help he is there’s no depending on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Off he goes always when I need him most.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘He thinks he ought to earn a little pay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough at least to buy tobacco with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he won’t have to beg and be beholden.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘All right,’ I say, ‘I can’t afford to pay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Any fixed wages, though I wish I could.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Someone else can.’ ‘Then someone else will have to.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shouldn’t mind his bettering himself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that was what it was. You can be certain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he begins like that, there’s someone at him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trying to coax him off with pocket-money⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haying time, when any help is scarce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In winter he comes back to us. I’m done.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sh! not so loud: he’ll hear you,” Mary said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I want him to: he’ll have to soon or late.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He’s worn out. He’s asleep beside the stove.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I came up from Rowe’s I found him here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A miserable sight, and frightening, too⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You needn’t smile⁠—I didn’t recognise him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wasn’t looking for him⁠—and he’s changed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait till you see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Where did you say he’d been?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He didn’t say. I dragged him to the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tried to make him talk about his travels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What did he say? Did he say anything?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But little.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Anything? Mary, confess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said he’d come to ditch the meadow for me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Warren!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“But did he? I just want to know.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of course he did. What would you have him say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely you wouldn’t grudge the poor old man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some humble way to save his self-respect.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He added, if you really care to know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He meant to clear the upper pasture, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sounds like something you have heard before?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warren, I wish you could have heard the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He jumbled everything. I stopped to look</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three times⁠—he made me feel so queer⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see if he was talking in his sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He ran on Harold Wilson⁠—you remember⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boy you had in haying four years since.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s finished school, and teaching in his college.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silas declares you’ll have to get him back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He says they two will make a team for work:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Between them they will lay this farm as smooth!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way he mixed that in with other things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks young Wilson a likely lad, though daft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On education⁠—you know how they fought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All through July under the blazing sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silas up on the cart to build the load,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harold along beside to pitch it on.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, I took care to keep well out of earshot.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well, those days trouble Silas like a dream.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wouldn’t think they would. How some things linger!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harold’s young college boy’s assurance piqued him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After so many years he still keeps finding</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good arguments he sees he might have used.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sympathise. I know just how it feels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think of the right thing to say too late.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harold’s associated in his mind with Latin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He asked me what I thought of Harold’s saying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He studied Latin like the violin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because he liked it⁠—that an argument!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said he couldn’t make the boy believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could find water with a hazel prong⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which showed how much good school had ever done him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wanted to go over that. But most of all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks if he could have another chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To teach him how to build a load of hay⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know, that’s Silas’ one accomplishment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He bundles every forkful in its place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tags and numbers it for future reference,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So he can find and easily dislodge it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the unloading. Silas does that well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He takes it out in bunches like big birds’ nests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never see him standing on the hay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s trying to lift, straining to lift himself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He thinks if he could teach him that, he’d be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some good perhaps to someone in the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hates to see a boy the fool of books.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poor Silas, so concerned for other folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing to look backward to with pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing to look forward to with hope,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So now and never any different.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Part of a moon was falling down the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the harp-like morning-glory strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she played unheard the tenderness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wrought on him beside her in the night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Warren,” she said, “he has come home to die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You needn’t be afraid he’ll leave you this time.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Home,” he mocked gently.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, what else but home?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It all depends on what you mean by home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of course he’s nothing to us, any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than was the hound that came a stranger to us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the woods, worn out upon the trail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Home is the place where, when you have to go there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have to take you in.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I should have called it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something you somehow haven’t to deserve.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warren leaned out and took a step or two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Picked up a little stick, and brought it back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And broke it in his hand and tossed it by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Silas has better claim on us you think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the road winds would bring him to his door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silas has walked that far no doubt today.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why didn’t he go there? His brother’s rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A somebody⁠—director in the bank.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He never told us that.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“We know it though.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I think his brother ought to help, of course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll see to that if there is need. He ought of right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take him in, and might be willing to⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may be better than appearances.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But have some pity on Silas. Do you think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he’d had any pride in claiming kin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or anything he looked for from his brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d keep so still about him all this time?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wonder what’s between them.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I can tell you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silas is what he is⁠—we wouldn’t mind him⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But just the kind that kinsfolk can’t abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never did a thing so very bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He don’t know why he isn’t quite as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As anyone. He won’t be made ashamed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To please his brother, worthless though he is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<em>I</em> can’t think Si ever hurt anyone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, but he hurt my heart the way he lay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged chair-back.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldn’t let me put him on the lounge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You must go in and see what you can do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I made the bed up for him there to-night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll be surprised at him⁠—how much he’s broken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His working days are done; I’m sure of it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’d not be in a hurry to say that.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I haven’t been. Go, look, see for yourself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, Warren, please remember how it is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s come to help you ditch the meadow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has a plan. You mustn’t laugh at him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may not speak of it, and then he may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll sit and see if that small sailing cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will hit or miss the moon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>It hit the moon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there were three there, making a dim row,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The moon, the little silver cloud, and she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warren returned⁠—too soon, it seemed to her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slipped to her side, caught up her hand and waited.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Warren,” she questioned.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Dead,” was all he answered.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-mountain" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Mountain</h2>
			<p>
				<span>The mountain held the town as in a shadow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw so much before I slept there once:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I noticed that I missed stars in the west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where its black body cut into the sky.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near me it seemed: I felt it like a wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind which I was sheltered from a wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet between the town and it I found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I walked forth at dawn to see new things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were fields, a river, and beyond, more fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The river at the time was fallen away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a widespread brawl on cobble-stones;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the signs showed what it had done in spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good grass-land gullied out, and in the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ridges of sand, and driftwood stripped of bark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I crossed the river and swung round the mountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there I met a man who moved so slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With white-faced oxen in a heavy cart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed no hand to stop him altogether.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What town is this?” I asked.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“This? Lunenburg.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then I was wrong: the town of my sojourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond the bridge, was not that of the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But only felt at night its shadowy presence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where is your village? Very far from here?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There is no village⁠—only scattered farms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We were but sixty voters last election.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We can’t in nature grow to many more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thing takes all the room!” He moved his goad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mountain stood there to be pointed at.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pasture ran up the side a little way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then there was a wall of trees with trunks:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After that only tops of trees, and cliffs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperfectly concealed among the leaves.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dry ravine emerged from under boughs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the pasture.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“That looks like a path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is that the way to reach the top from here?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for this morning, but some other time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must be getting back to breakfast now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I don’t advise your trying from this side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no proper path, but those that have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been up, I understand, have climbed from Ladd’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s five miles back. You can’t mistake the place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They logged it there last winter some way up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d take you, but I’m bound the other way.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’ve never climbed it?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I’ve been on the sides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deer-hunting and trout-fishing. There’s a brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That starts up on it somewhere⁠—I’ve heard say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right on the top, tip-top⁠—a curious thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what would interest you about the brook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s always cold in summer, warm in winter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the great sights going is to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It steam in winter like an ox’s breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the bushes all along its banks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are inch-deep with the frosty spines and bristles⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know the kind. Then let the sun shine on it!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There ought to be a view around the world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From such a mountain⁠—if it isn’t wooded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear to the top.” I saw through leafy screens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great granite terraces in sun and shadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shelves one could rest a knee on getting up⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With depths behind him sheer a hundred feet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or turn and sit on and look out and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With little ferns in crevices at his elbow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As to that I can’t say. But there’s the spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right on the summit, almost like a fountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ought to be worth seeing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“If it’s there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never saw it?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I guess there’s no doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About its being there. I never saw it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may not be right on the very top:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wouldn’t have to be a long way down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have some head of water from above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a <em>good distance</em> down might not be noticed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By anyone who’d come a long way up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One time I asked a fellow climbing it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look and tell me later how it was.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What did he say?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“He said there was a lake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere in Ireland on a mountain top.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But a lake’s different. What about the spring?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He never got up high enough to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s why I don’t advise your trying this side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He tried this side. I’ve always meant to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And look myself, but you know how it is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It doesn’t seem so much to climb a mountain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ve worked around the foot of all your life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What would I do? Go in my overalls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a big stick, the same as when the cows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haven’t come down to the bars at milking time?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with a shotgun for a stray black bear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twouldn’t seem real to climb for climbing it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I shouldn’t climb it if I didn’t want to⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for the sake of climbing. What’s its name?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“We call it Hor: I don’t know if that’s right.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Can one walk around it? Would it be too far?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You can drive round and keep in Lunenburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it’s as much as ever you can do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The boundary lines keep in so close to it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hor is the township, and the township’s Hor⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span><em>And</em> a few houses sprinkled round the foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like boulders broken off the upper cliff,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled out a little farther than the rest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Warm in December, cold in June, you say?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I don’t suppose the water’s changed at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You and I know enough to know it’s warm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Compared with cold, and cold compared with warm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all the fun’s in how you say a thing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’ve lived here all your life?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Ever since Hor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was no bigger than a⁠—” What, I did not hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He drew the oxen toward him with light touches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his slim goad on nose and offside flank,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave them their marching orders and was moving.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-hundred-collars" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Hundred Collars</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Lancaster bore him⁠—such a little town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a great man. It doesn’t see him often</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of late years, though he keeps the old homestead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends the children down there with their mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To run wild in the summer⁠—a little wild.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes he joins them for a day or two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sees old friends he somehow can’t get near.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They meet him in the general store at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pre-occupied with formidable mail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rifling a printed letter as he talks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seem afraid. He wouldn’t have it so:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a great scholar, he’s a democrat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If not at heart, at least on principle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lately when coming up to Lancaster</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His train being late he missed another train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had four hours to wait at Woodsville Junction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After eleven o’clock at night. Too tired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To think of sitting such an ordeal out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He turned to the hotel to find a bed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No room,” the night clerk said. “Unless⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woodsville’s a place of shrieks and wandering lamps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cars that shook and rattle⁠—and one hotel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You say ‘unless.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Unless you wouldn’t mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharing a room with someone else.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Who is it?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“So I should hope. What kind of man?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I know him: he’s all right. A man’s a man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Separate beds of course you understand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night clerk blinked his eyes and dared him on.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who’s that man sleeping in the office chair?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has he had the refusal of my chance?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He was afraid of being robbed or murdered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you say?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I’ll have to have a bed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night clerk led him up three flights of stairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down a narrow passage full of doors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the last one of which he knocked and entered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lafe, here’s a fellow wants to share your room.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Show him this way. I’m not afraid of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m not so drunk I can’t take care of myself.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night clerk clapped a bedstead on the foot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This will be yours. Good-night,” he said, and went.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lafe was the name, I think?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, <em>Lay</em>fayette.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You got it the first time. And yours?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Magoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doctor Magoon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="center">
				<span>“A Doctor?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Well, a teacher.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Professor Square-the-circle-till-you’re-tired?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold on, there’s something I don’t think of now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I had on my mind to ask the first</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man that knew anything I happened in with.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll ask you later⁠—don’t let me forget it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Doctor looked at Lafe and looked away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man? A brute. Naked above the waist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat there creased and shining in the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fumbling the buttons in a well-starched shirt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I’m moving into a size-larger shirt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve felt mean lately; mean’s no name for it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I just found what the matter was to-night:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve been a-choking like a nursery tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it outgrows the wire band of its name tag.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I blamed it on the hot spell we’ve been having.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis nothing but my foolish hanging back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not liking to own up I’d grown a size.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Number eighteen this is. What size do you wear?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Doctor caught his throat convulsively.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh⁠—ah⁠—fourteen⁠—fourteen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Fourteen! You say so!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can remember when I wore fourteen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come to think I must have back at home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than a hundred collars, size fourteen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too bad to waste them all. You ought to have them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re yours and welcome; let me send them to you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What makes you stand there on one leg like that?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re not much furtherer than where Kike left you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You act as if you wished you hadn’t come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit down or lie down, friend; you make me nervous.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Doctor made a subdued dash for it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And propped himself at bay against a pillow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not that way, with your shoes on Kike’s white bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can’t rest that way. Let me pull your shoes off.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Don’t touch me, please⁠—I say, don’t touch me, please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll not be put to bed by you, my man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Just as you say. Have it your own way then.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘My man’ is it? You talk like a professor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking of who’s afraid of who, however,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m thinking I have more to lose than you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If anything should happen to be wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wants to cut your number fourteen throat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let’s have a show down as an evidence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of good faith. There is ninety dollars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, if you’re not afraid.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“<em>I’m</em> not afraid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s five: that’s all I carry.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I can search you?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where are you moving over to? Stay still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d better tuck your money under you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sleep on it the way I always do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I’m with people I don’t trust at night.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Will you believe me if I put it there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right on the counterpane⁠—that I do trust you?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’d say so, Mister Man.⁠—I’m a collector.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My ninety isn’t mine⁠—you won’t think that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pick it up a dollar at a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All round the country for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Weekly News</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Published in Bow. You know the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Weekly News</i>?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Known it since I was young.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Then you know me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now we are getting on together⁠—talking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m sort of Something for it at the front.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My business is to find what people want:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They pay for it, and so they ought to have it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairbanks, he says to me⁠—he’s editor⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel out the public sentiment⁠—he says.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good deal comes on me when all is said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only trouble is we disagree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In politics: I’m Vermont Democrat⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know what that is, sort of double-dyed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The News has always been Republican.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairbanks, he says to me, ‘Help us this year,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meaning by us their ticket. ‘No,’ I says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I can’t and won’t. You’ve been in long enough:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s time you turned around and boosted us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll have to pay me more than ten a week</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I’m expected to elect Bill Taft.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I doubt if I could do it anyway.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You seem to shape the paper’s policy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see I’m in with everybody, know ’em all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I almost know their farms as well as they do.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You drive around? It must be pleasant work.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s business, but I can’t say it’s not fun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I like best’s the lay of different farms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming out on them from a stretch of woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or over a hill or round a sudden corner.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I like to find folks getting out in spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raking the dooryard, working near the house.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Later they get out further in the fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything’s shut sometimes except the barn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The family’s all away in some back meadow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s a hay load a-coming⁠—when it comes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And later still they all get driven in:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields are stripped to lawn, the garden patches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stripped to bare ground, the apple trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whips and poles. There’s nobody about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chimney, though, keeps up a good brisk smoking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I lie back and ride. I take the reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only when someone’s coming, and the mare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops when she likes: I tell her when to go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve spoiled Jemima in more ways than one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s got so she turns in at every house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if she had some sort of curvature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No matter if I have no errand there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thinks I’m sociable. I maybe am.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s seldom I get down except for meals, though.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folks entertain me from the kitchen doorstep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a family row down to the youngest.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One would suppose they might not be as glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see you as you are to see them.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Oh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I want their dollar. I don’t want</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything they’ve not got. I never dun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m there, and they can pay me if they like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I go nowhere on purpose: I happen by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorry there is no cup to give you a drink.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I drink out of the bottle⁠—not your style.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mayn’t I offer you⁠—?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“No, no, no, thank you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Just as you say. Here’s looking at you then.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I’m leaving you a little while.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll rest easier when I’m gone, perhaps⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie down⁠—let yourself go and get some sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first⁠—let’s see⁠—what was I going to ask you?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those collars⁠—who shall I address them to,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suppose you aren’t awake when I come back?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Really, friend, I can’t let you. You⁠—may need them.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not till I shrink, when they’ll be out of style.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But really I⁠—I have so many collars.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I don’t know who I rather would have have them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’re only turning yellow where they are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you’re the doctor as the saying is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll put the light out. Don’t you wait for me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve just begun the night. You get some sleep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll knock so-fashion and peep round the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I come back so you’ll know who it is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s nothing I’m afraid of like scared people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t want you should shoot me in the head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What am I doing carrying off this bottle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There now, you get some sleep.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>He shut the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Doctor slid a little down the pillow.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="home-burial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Home Burial</h2>
			<p>
				<span>He saw her from the bottom of the stairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before she saw him. She was starting down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking back over her shoulder at some fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She took a doubtful step and then undid it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raise herself and look again. He spoke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing toward her: “What is it you see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From up there always⁠—for I want to know.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She turned and sank upon her skirts at that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her face changed from terrified to dull.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said to gain time: “What is it you see,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounting until she cowered under him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will find out now⁠—you must tell me, dear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, in her place, refused him any help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the least stiffening of her neck and silence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She let him look, sure that he wouldn’t see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind creature; and a while he didn’t see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at last he murmured, “Oh,” and again, “Oh.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What is it⁠—what?” she said.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Just that I see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You don’t,” she challenged. “Tell me what it is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wonder is I didn’t see at once.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never noticed it from here before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must be wonted to it⁠—that’s the reason.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little graveyard where my people are!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So small the window frames the whole of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not so much larger than a bedroom, is it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are three stones of slate and one of marble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad-shouldered little slabs there in the sunlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sidehill. We haven’t to mind those.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I understand: it is not the stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the child’s mound⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Don’t, don’t, don’t, don’t,” she cried.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She withdrew shrinking from beneath his arm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rested on the banister, and slid downstairs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turned on him with such a daunting look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said twice over before he knew himself:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Can’t a man speak of his own child he’s lost?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not you! Oh, where’s my hat? Oh, I don’t need it!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must get out of here. I must get air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t know rightly whether any man can.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Amy! Don’t go to someone else this time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to me. I won’t come down the stairs.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sat and fixed his chin between his fists.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There’s something I should like to ask you, dear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You don’t know how to ask it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Help me, then.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her fingers moved the latch for all reply.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My words are nearly always an offence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t know how to speak of anything</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So as to please you. But I might be taught</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should suppose. I can’t say I see how.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man must partly give up being a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With women-folk. We could have some arrangement</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By which I’d bind myself to keep hands off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything special you’re a-mind to name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I don’t like such things ’twixt those that love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two that don’t love can’t live together without them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But two that do can’t live together with them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She moved the latch a little. “Don’t⁠—don’t go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t carry it to someone else this time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me about it if it’s something human.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me into your grief. I’m not so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unlike other folks as your standing there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apart would make me out. Give me my chance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do think, though, you overdo it a little.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was it brought you up to think it the thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take your mother-loss of a first child</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So inconsolably⁠—in the face of love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’d think his memory might be satisfied⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There you go sneering now!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I’m not, I’m not!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You make me angry. I’ll come down to you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God, what a woman! And it’s come to this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man can’t speak of his own child that’s dead.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You can’t because you don’t know how.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If you had any feelings, you that dug</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your own hand⁠—how could you?⁠—his little grave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw you from that very window there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making the gravel leap and leap in air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leap up, like that, like that, and land so lightly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roll back down the mound beside the hole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought, Who is that man? I didn’t know you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I crept down the stairs and up the stairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To look again, and still your spade kept lifting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then you came in. I heard your rumbling voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out in the kitchen, and I don’t know why,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I went near to see with my own eyes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You could sit there with the stains on your shoes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fresh earth from your own baby’s grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And talk about your everyday concerns.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You had stood the spade up against the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Outside there in the entry, for I saw it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I shall laugh the worst laugh I ever laughed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m cursed. God, if I don’t believe I’m cursed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I can repeat the very words you were saying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Three foggy mornings and one rainy day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will rot the best birch fence a man can build.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think of it, talk like that at such a time!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What had how long it takes a birch to rot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do with what was in the darkened parlour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You <em>couldn’t</em> care! The nearest friends can go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With anyone to death, comes so far short</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They might as well not try to go at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, from the time when one is sick to death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One is alone, and he dies more alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends make pretence of following to the grave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But before one is in it, their minds are turned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And making the best of their way back to life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And living people, and things they understand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the world’s evil. I won’t have grief so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I can change it. Oh, I won’t, I won’t!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There, you have said it all and you feel better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You won’t go now. You’re crying. Close the door.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heart’s gone out of it: why keep it up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amy! There’s someone coming down the road!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“<em>You</em>⁠—oh, you think the talk is all. I must go⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere out of this house. How can I make you⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If⁠—you⁠—do!” She was opening the door wider.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where do you mean to go? First tell me that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll follow and bring you back by force. I <em>will</em>!⁠—”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-black-cottage" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Black Cottage</h2>
			<p>
				<span>We chanced in passing by that afternoon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch it in a sort of special picture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among tar-banded ancient cherry trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set well back from the road in rank lodged grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little cottage we were speaking of,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A front with just a door between two windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fresh painted by the shower a velvet black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We paused, the minister and I, to look.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made as if to hold it at arm’s length</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or put the leaves aside that framed it in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pretty,” he said. “Come in. No one will care.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The path was a vague parting in the grass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That led us to a weathered window-sill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We pressed our faces to the pane. “You see,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Everything’s as she left it when she died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her sons won’t sell the house or the things in it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They say they mean to come and summer here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where they were boys. They haven’t come this year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They live so far away⁠—one is out west⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will be hard for them to keep their word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anyway they won’t have the place disturbed.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A buttoned hair-cloth lounge spread scrolling arms</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under a crayon portrait on the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done sadly from an old daguerreotype.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That was the father as he went to war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She always, when she talked about war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner or later came and leaned, half knelt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the lounge beside it, though I doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If such unlifelike lines kept power to stir</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything in her after all the years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell at Gettysburg or Fredericksburg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ought to know⁠—it makes a difference which:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fredericksburg wasn’t Gettysburg, of course.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what I’m getting to is how forsaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little cottage this has always seemed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since she went more than ever, but before⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t mean altogether by the lives</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had gone out of it, the father first,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the two sons, till she was left alone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Nothing could draw her after those two sons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She valued the considerate neglect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had at some cost taught them after years.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I mean by the world’s having passed it by⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we almost got by this afternoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It always seems to me a sort of mark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To measure how far fifty years have brought us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why not sit down if you are in no haste?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These doorsteps seldom have a visitor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The warping boards pull out their own old nails</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With none to tread and put them in their place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had her own idea of things, the old lady.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she liked talk. She had seen Garrison</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Whittier, and had her story of them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One wasn’t long in learning that she thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whatever else the Civil War was for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It wasn’t just to keep the States together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor just to free the slaves, though it did both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wouldn’t have believed those ends enough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have given outright for them all she gave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her giving somehow touched the principle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all men are created free and equal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to hear her quaint phrases⁠—so removed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the world’s view today of all those things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s a hard mystery of Jefferson’s.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What did he mean? Of course the easy way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is to decide it simply isn’t true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may not be. I heard a fellow say so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But never mind, the Welshman got it planted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it will trouble us a thousand years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each age will have to reconsider it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You couldn’t tell her what the West was saying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what the South to her serene belief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had some art of hearing and yet not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing the latter wisdom of the world.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White was the only race she ever knew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black she had scarcely seen, and yellow never.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how could they be made so very unlike</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the same hand working in the same stuff?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had supposed the war decided that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are you going to do with such a person?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange how such innocence gets its own way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shouldn’t be surprised if in this world</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were the force that would at last prevail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do you know but for her there was a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When to please younger members of the church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or rather say non-members in the church,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom we all have to think of nowadays,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have changed the Creed a very little?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not that she ever had to ask me not to;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It never got so far as that; but the bare thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her old tremulous bonnet in the pew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of her half asleep was too much for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, I might wake her up and startle her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was the words ‘descended into Hades’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seemed too pagan to our liberal youth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know they suffered from a general onslaught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well, if they weren’t true why keep right on</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saying them like the heathen? We could drop them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only⁠—there was the bonnet in the pew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a phrase couldn’t have meant much to her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But suppose she had missed it from the Creed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a child misses the unsaid Good-night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falls asleep with heartache⁠—how should <em>I</em> feel?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m just as glad she made me keep hands off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, dear me, why abandon a belief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merely because it ceases to be true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cling to it long enough, and not a doubt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will turn true again, for so it goes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most of the change we think we see in life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is due to truths being in and out of favour.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I sit here, and oftentimes, I wish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could be monarch of a desert land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I could devote and dedicate forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the truths we keep coming back and back to.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So desert it would have to be, so walled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mountain ranges half in summer snow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one would covet it or think it worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pains of conquering to force change on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered oases where men dwelt, but mostly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sand dunes held loosely in tamarisk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blown over and over themselves in idleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sand grains should sugar in the natal dew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The babe born to the desert, the sand storm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retard mid-waste my cowering caravans⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There are bees in this wall.” He struck the clapboards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce heads looked out; small bodies pivoted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We rose to go. Sunset blazed on the windows.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="blueberries" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Blueberries</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“You ought to have seen what I saw on my way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the village, through Mortenson’s pasture today:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blueberries as big as the end of your thumb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Real sky-blue, and heavy, and ready to drum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cavernous pail of the first one to come!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all ripe together, not some of them green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some of them ripe! You ought to have seen!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I don’t know what part of the pasture you mean.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You know where they cut off the woods⁠—let me see⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was two years ago⁠—or no!⁠—can it be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer than that?⁠—and the following fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire ran and burned it all up but the wall.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why, there hasn’t been time for the bushes to grow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s always the way with the blueberries, though:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may not have been the ghost of a sign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of them anywhere under the shade of the pine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But get the pine out of the way, you may burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pasture all over until not a fern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or grass-blade is left, not to mention a stick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And presto, they’re up all around you as thick</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hard to explain as a conjuror’s trick.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It must be on charcoal they fatten their fruit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I taste in them sometimes the flavour of soot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after all really they’re ebony skinned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blue’s but a mist from the breath of the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A tarnish that goes at a touch of the hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And less than the tan with which pickers are tanned.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Does Mortenson know what he has, do you think?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He may and not care and so leave the chewink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gather them for him⁠—you know what he is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He won’t make the fact that they’re rightfully his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An excuse for keeping us other folk out.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wonder you didn’t see Loren about.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The best of it was that I did. Do you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was just getting through what the field had to show</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over the wall and into the road,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When who should come by, with a democrat-load</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the young chattering Lorens alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Loren, the fatherly, out for a drive.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He saw you, then? What did he do? Did he frown?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He just kept nodding his head up and down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know how politely he always goes by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he thought a big thought⁠—I could tell by his eye⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which being expressed, might be this in effect:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I have left those there berries, I shrewdly suspect,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ripen too long. I am greatly to blame.’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He’s a thriftier person than some I could name.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He seems to be thrifty; and hasn’t he need,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the mouths of all those young Lorens to feed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has brought them all up on wild berries, they say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like birds. They store a great many away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They eat them the year round, and those they don’t eat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They sell in the store and buy shoes for their feet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who cares what they say? It’s a nice way to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just taking what Nature is willing to give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not forcing her hand with harrow and plow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wish you had seen his perpetual bow⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the air of the youngsters! Not one of them turned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they looked so solemn-absurdly concerned.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wish I knew half what the flock of them know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of where all the berries and other things grow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cranberries in bogs and raspberries on top</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the boulder-strewn mountain, and when they will crop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I met them one day and each had a flower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuck into his berries as fresh as a shower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some strange kind⁠—they told me it hadn’t a name.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’ve told you how once not long after we came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I almost provoked poor Loren to mirth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By going to him of all people on earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ask if he knew any fruit to be had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the picking. The rascal, he said he’d be glad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell if he knew. But the year had been bad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There <em>had</em> been some berries⁠—but those were all gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He didn’t say where they had been. He went on:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I’m sure⁠—I’m sure’⁠—as polite as could be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke to his wife in the door, ‘Let me see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mame, <em>we</em> don’t know any good berrying place?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was all he could do to keep a straight face.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If he thinks all the fruit that grows wild is for him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll find he’s mistaken. See here, for a whim,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll pick in the Mortensons’ pasture this year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ll go in the morning, that is, if it’s clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sun shines out warm: the vines must be wet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s so long since I picked I almost forget</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How we used to pick berries: we took one look round,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sank out of sight like trolls underground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw nothing more of each other, or heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless when you said I was keeping a bird</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Away from its nest, and I said it was you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Well, one of us is.’ For complaining it flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around and around us. And then for a while</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We picked, till I feared you had wandered a mile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I thought I had lost you. I lifted a shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too loud for the distance you were, it turned out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For when you made answer, your voice was as low</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As talking⁠—you stood up beside me, you know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“We sha’n’t have the place to ourselves to enjoy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not likely, when all the young Lorens deploy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They’ll be there tomorrow, or even to-night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They won’t be too friendly⁠—they may be polite⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To people they look on as having no right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pick where they’re picking. But we won’t complain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ought to have seen how it looked in the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruit mixed with water in layers of leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like two kinds of jewels, a vision for thieves.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="a-servant-to-servants" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Servant to Servants</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I didn’t make you know how glad I was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have you come and camp here on our land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I promised myself to get down some day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see the way you lived, but I don’t know!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a houseful of hungry men to feed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess you’d find. … It seems to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t express my feelings any more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than I can raise my voice or want to lift</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My hand (oh, I can lift it when I have to).</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did ever you feel so? I hope you never.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s got so I don’t even know for sure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether I <em>am</em> glad, sorry, or anything.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s nothing but a voice-like left inside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That seems to tell me how I ought to feel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would feel if I wasn’t all gone wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You take the lake. I look and look at it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see it’s a fair, pretty sheet of water.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I stand and make myself repeat out loud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The advantages it has, so long and narrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a deep piece of some old running river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut short off at both ends. It lies five miles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight away through the mountain notch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sink window where I wash the plates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all our storms come up toward the house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawing the slow waves whiter and whiter and whiter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It took my mind off doughnuts and soda biscuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To step outdoors and take the water dazzle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sunny morning, or take the rising wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my face and body and through my wrapper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a storm threatened from the Dragon’s Den,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a cold chill shivered across the lake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see it’s a fair, pretty sheet of water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our Willoughby! How did you hear of it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I expect, though, everyone’s heard of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a book about ferns? Listen to that!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You let things more like feathers regulate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your going and coming. And you like it here?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can see how you might. But I don’t know!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would be different if more people came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For then there would be business. As it is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cottages Len built, sometimes we rent them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes we don’t. We’ve a good piece of shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ought to be worth something, and may yet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I don’t count on it as much as Len.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looks on the bright side of everything,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Including me. He thinks I’ll be all right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With doctoring. But it’s not medicine⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowe is the only doctor’s dared to say so⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s rest I want⁠—there, I have said it out⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From cooking meals for hungry hired men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And washing dishes after them⁠—from doing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things over and over that just won’t stay done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good rights I ought not to have so much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on me, but there seems no other way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Len says one steady pull more ought to do it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He says the best way out is always through.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I agree to that, or in so far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As that I can see no way out but through⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leastways for me⁠—and then they’ll be convinced.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s not that Len don’t want the best for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was his plan our moving over in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside the lake from where that day I showed you</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We used to live⁠—ten miles from anywhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We didn’t change without some sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Len went at it to make up the loss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His work’s a man’s, of course, from sun to sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he works when he works as hard as I do⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though there’s small profit in comparisons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Women and men will make them all the same.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But work ain’t all. Len undertakes too much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s into everything in town. This year</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s highways, and he’s got too many men</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around him to look after that make waste.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They take advantage of him shamefully,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And proud, too, of themselves for doing so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have four here to board, great good-for-nothings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprawling about the kitchen with their talk</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I fry their bacon. Much they care!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more put out in what they do or say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than if I wasn’t in the room at all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming and going all the time, they are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t learn what their names are, let alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their characters, or whether they are safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have inside the house with doors unlocked.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m not afraid of them, though, if they’re not</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afraid of me. There’s two can play at that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have my fancies: it runs in the family.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s brother wasn’t right. They kept him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Locked up for years back there at the old farm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve been away once⁠—yes, I’ve been away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The State Asylum. I was prejudiced;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wouldn’t have sent anyone of mine there;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know the old idea⁠—the only asylum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the poorhouse, and those who could afford,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than send their folks to such a place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept them at home; and it does seem more human.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it’s not so: the place is the asylum.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There they have every means proper to do with,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you aren’t darkening other people’s lives⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worse than no good to them, and they no good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you in your condition; you can’t know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Affection or the want of it in that state.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve heard too much of the old-fashioned way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s brother, he went mad quite young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some thought he had been bitten by a dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because his violence took on the form</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of carrying his pillow in his teeth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it’s more likely he was crossed in love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or so the story goes. It was some girl.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anyway all he talked about was love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They soon saw he would do someone a mischief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he wa’n’t kept strict watch of, and it ended</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In father’s building him a sort of cage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or room within a room, of hickory poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like stanchions in the barn, from floor to ceiling⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A narrow passage all the way around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything they put in for furniture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d tear to pieces, even a bed to lie on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So they made the place comfortable with straw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a beast’s stall, to ease their consciences.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of course they had to feed him without dishes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tried to keep him clothed, but he paraded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his clothes on his arm⁠—all of his clothes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cruel⁠—it sounds. I ’spose they did the best</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They knew. And just when he was at the height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father and mother married, and mother came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bride, to help take care of such a creature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And accommodate her young life to his.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was what marrying father meant to her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had to lie and hear love things made dreadful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his shouts in the night. He’d shout and shout</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until the strength was shouted out of him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his voice died down slowly from exhaustion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d pull his bars apart like bow and bow-string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let them go and make them twang until</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands had worn them smooth as any ox-bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then he’d crow as if he thought that child’s play⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The only fun he had. I’ve heard them say, though,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They found a way to put a stop to it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was before my time⁠—I never saw him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the pen stayed exactly as it was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There in the upper chamber in the ell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sort of catch-all full of attic clutter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I often think of the smooth hickory bars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It got so I would say⁠—you know, half fooling⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It’s time I took my turn upstairs in jail”⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as you will till it becomes a habit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No wonder I was glad to get away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mind you, I waited till Len said the word.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I didn’t want the blame if things went wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was glad though, no end, when we moved out,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I looked to be happy, and I was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I said, for a while⁠—but I don’t know!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somehow the change wore out like a prescription.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there’s more to it than just window-views</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And living by a lake. I’m past such help⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless Len took the notion, which he won’t,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I won’t ask him⁠—it’s not sure enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ’spose I’ve got to go the road I’m going:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other folks have to, and why shouldn’t I?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I almost think if I could do like you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop everything and live out on the ground⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it might be, come night, I shouldn’t like it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a long rain. I should soon get enough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be glad of a good roof overhead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve lain awake thinking of you, I’ll warrant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than you have yourself, some of these nights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wonder was the tents weren’t snatched away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From over you as you lay in your beds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I haven’t courage for a risk like that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bless you, of course, you’re keeping me from work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the thing of it is, I need to <em>be</em> kept.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s work enough to do⁠—there’s always that;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But behind’s behind. The worst that you can do</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is set me back a little more behind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I sha’n’t catch up in this world, anyway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d <em>rather</em> you’d not go unless you must.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="after-apple-picking" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">After Apple-Picking</h2>
			<p>
				<span>My long two-pointed ladder’s sticking through a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward heaven still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there’s a barrel that I didn’t fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside it, and there may be two or three</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apples I didn’t pick upon some bough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am done with apple-picking now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Essence of winter sleep is on the night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The scent of apples: I am drowsing off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I got from looking through a pane of glass</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held against the world of hoary grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It melted, and I let it fall and break.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I was well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my way to sleep before it fell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I could tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What form my dreaming was about to take.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magnified apples appear and disappear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stem end and blossom end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every fleck of russet showing clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My instep arch not only keeps the ache,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I keep hearing from the cellar bin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rumbling sound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of load on load of apples coming in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I have had too much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of apple-picking: I am overtired</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the great harvest I myself desired.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That struck the earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went surely to the cider-apple heap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As of no worth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One can see what will trouble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sleep of mine, whatever sleep it is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were he not gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woodchuck could say whether it’s like his</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long sleep, as I describe its coming on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or just some human sleep.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-code" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Code</h2>
			<p>
				<span>There were three in the meadow by the brook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathering up windrows, piling cocks of hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With an eye always lifted toward the west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where an irregular sun-bordered cloud</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkly advanced with a perpetual dagger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flickering across its bosom. Suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One helper, thrusting pitchfork in the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marched himself off the field and home. One stayed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town-bred farmer failed to understand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What is there wrong?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Something you just now said.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What did I say?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“About our taking pains.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To cock the hay?⁠—because it’s going to shower?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said that more than half an hour ago.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said it to myself as much as you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You didn’t know. But James is one big fool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought you meant to find fault with his work.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s what the average farmer would have meant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>James would take time, of course, to chew it over</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he acted: he’s just got round to act.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He is a fool if that’s the way he takes me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Don’t let it bother you. You’ve found out something.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hand that knows his business won’t be told</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do work better or faster⁠—those two things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m as particular as anyone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Most likely I’d have served you just the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I know you don’t understand our ways.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You were just talking what was in your mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was in all our minds, and you weren’t hinting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell you a story of what happened once:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was up here in Salem at a man’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Named Sanders with a gang of four or five</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doing the haying. No one liked the boss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was one of the kind sports call a spider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All wiry arms and legs that spread out wavy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a humped body nigh as big’s a biscuit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But work! that man could work, especially</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If by so doing he could get more work</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of his hired help. I’m not denying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was hard on himself. I couldn’t find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he kept any hours⁠—not for himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daylight and lantern-light were one to him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve heard him pounding in the barn all night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what he liked was someone to encourage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them that he couldn’t lead he’d get behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drive, the way you can, you know, in mowing⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep at their heels and threaten to mow their legs off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d seen about enough of his bulling tricks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(We call that bulling). I’d been watching him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So when he paired off with me in the hayfield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To load the load, thinks I, Look out for trouble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I built the load and topped it off; old Sanders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Combed it down with a rake and says, ‘OK.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything went well till we reached the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a big catch to empty in a bay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You understand that meant the easy job</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the man up on top of throwing <em>down</em></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hay and rolling it off wholesale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where on a mow it would have been slow lifting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You wouldn’t think a fellow’d need much urging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under these circumstances, would you now?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the old fool seizes his fork in both hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And looking up bewhiskered out of the pit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouts like an army captain, ‘Let her come!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinks I, D’ye mean it? ‘What was that you said?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I asked out loud, so’s there’d be no mistake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Did you say, Let her come?’ ‘Yes, let her come.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said it over, but he said it softer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never you say a thing like that to a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not if he values what he is. God, I’d as soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murdered him as left out his middle name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d built the load and knew right where to find it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two or three forkfuls I picked lightly round for</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like meditating, and then I just dug in</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dumped the rackful on him in ten lots.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I looked over the side once in the dust</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And caught sight of him treading-water-like,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keeping his head above. ‘Damn ye,’ I says,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘That gets ye!’ He squeaked like a squeezed rat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was the last I saw or heard of him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I cleaned the rack and drove out to cool off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I sat mopping hayseed from my neck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sort of waiting to be asked about it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of the boys sings out, ‘Where’s the old man?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I left him in the barn under the hay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye want him, ye can go and dig him out.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They realized from the way I swobbed my neck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than was needed something must be up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They headed for the barn; I stayed where I was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They told me afterward. First they forked hay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lot of it, out into the barn floor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing! They listened for him. Not a rustle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess they thought I’d spiked him in the temple</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I buried him, or I couldn’t have managed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They excavated more. ‘Go keep his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the barn.’ Someone looked in a window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And curse me if he wasn’t in the kitchen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slumped way down in a chair, with both his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuck in the oven, the hottest day that summer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He looked so clean disgusted from behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no one that dared to stir him up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or let him know that he was being looked at.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Apparently I hadn’t buried him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(I may have knocked him down); but my just trying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bury him had hurt his dignity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had gone to the house so’s not to meet me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept away from us all afternoon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We tended to his hay. We saw him out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a while picking peas in his garden:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldn’t keep away from doing something.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Weren’t you relieved to find he wasn’t dead?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No! and yet I don’t know⁠—it’s hard to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I went about to kill him fair enough.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You took an awkward way. Did he discharge you?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Discharge me? No! He knew I did just right.”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-generations-of-men" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Generations of Men</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A governor it was proclaimed this time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all who would come seeking in New Hampshire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancestral memories might come together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those of the name Stark gathered in Bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rock-strewn town where farming has fallen off,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sprout-lands flourish where the axe has gone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone had literally run to earth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an old cellar hole in a by-road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The origin of all the family there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence they were sprung, so numerous a tribe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now not all the houses left in town</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made shift to shelter them without the help</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of here and there a tent in grove and orchard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were at Bow, but that was not enough:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing would do but they must fix a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stand together on the crater’s verge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That turned them on the world, and try to fathom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The past and get some strangeness out of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rain spoiled all. The day began uncertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clouds low trailing and moments of rain that misted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The young folk held some hope out to each other</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till well toward noon when the storm settled down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a swish in the grass. “What if the others</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are there,” they said. “It isn’t going to rain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only one from a farm not far away</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strolled thither, not expecting he would find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anyone else, but out of idleness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One, and one other, yes, for there were two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The second round the curving hillside road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a girl; and she halted some way off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reconnoitre, and then made up her mind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At least to pass by and see who he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perhaps hear some word about the weather.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was some Stark she didn’t know. He nodded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“No fête today,” he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“It looks that way.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She swept the heavens, turning on her heel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I only idled down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I idled down.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Provision there had been for just such meeting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stranger cousins, in a family tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn on a sort of passport with the branch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the one bearing it done in detail⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some zealous one’s laborious device.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She made a sudden movement toward her bodice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one who clasps her heart. They laughed together.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Stark?” he inquired. “No matter for the proof.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, Stark. And you?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I’m Stark.” He drew his passport.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You know we might not be and still be cousins:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town is full of Chases, Lowes, and Baileys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All claiming some priority in Starkness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My mother was a Lane, yet might have married</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anyone upon earth and still her children</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have been Starks, and doubtless here today.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You riddle with your genealogy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a Viola. I don’t follow you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I only mean my mother was a Stark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Several times over, and by marrying father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more than brought us back into the name.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“One ought not to be thrown into confusion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a plain statement of relationship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I own what you say makes my head spin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You take my card⁠—you seem so good at such things⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see if you can reckon our cousinship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why not take seats here on the cellar wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dangle feet among the raspberry vines?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Under the shelter of the family tree.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Just so⁠—that ought to be enough protection.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not from the rain. I think it’s going to rain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s raining.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“No, it’s misting; let’s be fair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does the rain seem to you to cool the eyes?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The situation was like this: the road</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bowed outward on the mountain half-way up,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And disappeared and ended not far off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one went home that way. The only house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beyond where they were was a shattered seedpod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And below roared a brook hidden in trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sound of which was silence for the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This he sat listening to till she gave judgment.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“On father’s side, it seems, we’re⁠—let me see⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Don’t be too technical.⁠—You have three cards.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Four cards, one yours, three mine, one for each branch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Stark family I’m a member of.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“D’you know a person so related to herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is supposed to be mad.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I may be mad.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You look so, sitting out here in the rain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studying genealogy with me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never saw before. What will we come to</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all this pride of ancestry, we Yankees?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think we’re all mad. Tell me why we’re here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn into town about this cellar hole</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like wild geese on a lake before a storm?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do we see in such a hole, I wonder.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The Indians had a myth of Chicamoztoc,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which means The Seven Caves that We Came out of.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the pit from which we Starks were digged.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You must be learned. That’s what you see in it?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And what do you see?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, what <em>do</em> I see?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First let me look. I see raspberry vines⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, if you’re going to use your eyes, just hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What <em>I</em> see. It’s a little, little boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As pale and dim as a match flame in the sun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s groping in the cellar after jam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks it’s dark and it’s flooded with daylight.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He’s nothing. Listen. When I lean like this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can make out old Grandsir Stark distinctly⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his pipe in his mouth and his brown jug⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bless you, it isn’t Grandsir Stark, it’s Granny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the pipe’s there and smoking and the jug.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s after cider, the old girl, she’s thirsty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here’s hoping she gets her drink and gets out safely.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell me about her. Does she look like me?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She should, shouldn’t she, you’re so many times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over descended from her. I believe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She does look like you. Stay the way you are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nose is just the same, and so’s the chin⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making allowance, making due allowance.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You poor, dear, great, great, great, great Granny!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“See that you get her greatness right. Don’t stint her.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, it’s important, though you think it isn’t.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I won’t be teased. But see how wet I am.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, you must go; we can’t stay here for ever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But wait until I give you a hand up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bead of silver water more or less</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strung on your hair won’t hurt your summer looks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wanted to try something with the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the brook raises in the empty valley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have seen visions⁠—now consult the voices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something I must have learned riding in trains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I was young. I used the roar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set the voices speaking out of it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking or singing, and the band-music playing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perhaps you have the art of what I mean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve never listened in among the sounds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a brook makes in such a wild descent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It ought to give a purer oracle.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s as you throw a picture on a screen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The meaning of it all is out of you;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voices give you what you wish to hear.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Strangely, it’s anything they wish to give.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I don’t know. It must be strange enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder if it’s not your make-believe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you think you’re like to hear today?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“From the sense of our having been together⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But why take time for what I’m like to hear?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll tell you what the voices really say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will do very well right where you are</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little longer. I mustn’t feel too hurried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or I can’t give myself to hear the voices.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Is this some trance you are withdrawing into?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You must be very still; you mustn’t talk.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’ll hardly breathe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“The voices seem to say⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’m waiting.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Don’t! The voices seem to say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call her Nausicaa, the unafraid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of an acquaintance made adventurously.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I let you say that⁠—on consideration.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I don’t see very well how you can help it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You want the truth. I speak but by the voices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see they know I haven’t had your name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though what a name should matter between us⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I shall suspect⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Be good. The voices say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call her Nausicaa, and take a timber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That you shall find lies in the cellar charred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the raspberries, and hew and shape it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a door-sill or other corner piece</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a new cottage on the ancient spot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The life is not yet all gone out of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And come and make your summer dwelling here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And perhaps she will come, still unafraid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sit before you in the open door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With flowers in her lap until they fade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But not come in across the sacred sill⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wonder where your oracle is tending.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can see that there’s something wrong with it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or it would speak in dialect. Whose voice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does it purport to speak in? Not old Grandsir’s</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Granny’s, surely. Call up one of them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They have best right to be heard in this place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You seem so partial to our great-grandmother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Nine times removed. Correct me if I err.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You will be likely to regard as sacred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anything she may say. But let me warn you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Folks in her day were given to plain speaking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You think you’d best tempt her at such a time?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It rests with us always to cut her off.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well then, it’s Granny speaking: ‘I dunnow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mebbe I’m wrong to take it as I do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There ain’t no names quite like the old ones though,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor never will be to my way of thinking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One mustn’t bear too hard on the new comers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there’s a dite too many of them for comfort.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should feel easier if I could see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More of the salt wherewith they’re to be salted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son, you do as you’re told! You take the timber⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s as sound as the day when it was cut⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begin over⁠—’ There, she’d better stop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can see what is troubling Granny, though.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But don’t you think we sometimes make too much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the old stock? What counts is the ideals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those will bear some keeping still about.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I can see we are going to be good friends.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I like your ‘going to be.’ You said just now</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s going to rain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I know, and it was raining.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I let you say all that. But I must go now.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You let me say it? on consideration?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall we say good-bye in such a case?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How shall we?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Will you leave the way to me?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, I don’t trust your eyes. You’ve said enough.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now give me your hand up.⁠—Pick me that flower.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Where shall we meet again?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Nowhere but here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once more before we meet elsewhere.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In rain?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It ought to be in rain. Sometime in rain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rain tomorrow, shall we, if it rains?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if we must, in sunshine.” So she went.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-housekeeper" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Housekeeper</h2>
			<p>
				<span>
					<i>I let myself in at the kitchen door.</i>
				</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s you,” <i>she said.</i> “I can’t get up. Forgive me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not answering your knock. I can no more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let people in than I can keep them out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m getting too old for my size, I tell them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My fingers are about all I’ve the use of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So’s to take any comfort. I can sew:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I help out with this beadwork what I can.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That’s a smart pair of pumps you’re beading there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who are they for?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“You mean?⁠—oh, for some miss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t keep track of other people’s daughters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lord, if I were to dream of everyone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose shoes I primped to dance in!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“And where’s John?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Haven’t you seen him? Strange what set you off</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To come to his house when he’s gone to yours.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can’t have passed each other. I know what:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must have changed his mind and gone to Garlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He won’t be long in that case. You can wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though what good you can be, or anyone⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s gone so far. You’ve heard? Estelle’s run off.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, what’s it all about? When did she go?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Two weeks since.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“She’s in earnest, it appears.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’m sure she won’t come back. She’s hiding somewhere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I don’t know where myself. John thinks I do.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks I only have to say the word,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she’ll come back. But, bless you, I’m her mother⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t talk to her, and, Lord, if I could!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It will go hard with John. What will he do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can’t find anyone to take her place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, if you ask me that, what <em>will</em> he do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gets some sort of bakeshop meals together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With me to sit and tell him everything,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s wanted and how much and where it is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I’m gone⁠—of course I can’t stay here:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Estelle’s to take me when she’s settled down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He and I only hinder one another.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I tell them they can’t get me through the door, though:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve been built in here like a big church organ.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’ve been here fifteen years.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“That’s a long time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To live together and then pull apart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How do you see him living when you’re gone?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two of you out will leave an empty house.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I don’t just see him living many years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left here with nothing but the furniture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hate to think of the old place when we’re gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the brook going by below the yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no one here but hens blowing about.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he could sell the place, but then, he can’t:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one will ever live on it again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s too run down. This is the last of it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I think he will do, is let things smash.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’ll sort of swear the time away. He’s awful!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I never saw a man let family troubles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make so much difference in his man’s affairs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s just dropped everything. He’s like a child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I blame his being brought up by his mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s got hay down that’s been rained on three times.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hoed a little yesterday for me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought the growing things would do him good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something went wrong. I saw him throw the hoe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sky-high with both hands. I can see it now⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come here⁠—I’ll show you⁠—in that apple tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s no way for a man to do at his age:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s fifty-five, you know, if he’s a day.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Aren’t you afraid of him? What’s that gun for?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Oh, that’s been there for hawks since chicken-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John Hall touch me! Not if he knows his friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll say that for him, John’s no threatener</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like some men folk. No one’s afraid of him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is, he’s made up his mind not to stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he has got to stand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Where is Estelle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldn’t one talk to her? What does she say?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You say you don’t know where she is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Nor want to!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She thinks if it was bad to live with him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It must be right to leave him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Which is wrong!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, but he should have married her.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The strain’s been too much for her all these years:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t explain it any other way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s different with a man, at least with John:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knows he’s kinder than the run of men.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than married ought to be as good</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As married⁠—that’s what he has always said.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know the way he’s felt⁠—but all the same!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wonder why he doesn’t marry her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And end it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Too late now: she wouldn’t have him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s given her time to think of something else.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s his mistake. The dear knows my interest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been to keep the thing from breaking up.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a good home: I don’t ask for better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But when I’ve said, ‘Why shouldn’t they be married,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d say, ‘Why should they?’ no more words than that.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And after all why should they? John’s been fair</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I take it. What was his was always hers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no quarrel about property.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Reason enough, there was no property.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A friend or two as good as own the farm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as it is. It isn’t worth the mortgage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I mean Estelle has always held the purse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The rights of that are harder to get at.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I guess Estelle and I have filled the purse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis we let him have money, not he us.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John’s a bad farmer. I’m not blaming him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take it year in, year out, he doesn’t make much.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We came here for a home for me, you know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Estelle to do the housework for the board</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of both of us. But look how it turns out:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She seems to have the housework, and besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half of the outdoor work, though as for that,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’d say she does it more because she likes it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see our pretty things are all outdoors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our hens and cows and pigs are always better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than folks like us have any business with.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farmers around twice as well off as we</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haven’t as good. They don’t go with the farm.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One thing you can’t help liking about John,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s fond of nice things⁠—too fond, some would say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Estelle don’t complain: she’s like him there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wants our hens to be the best there are.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You never saw this room before a show,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of lank, shivery, half-drowned birds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In separate coops, having their plumage done.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smell of the wet feathers in the heat!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You spoke of John’s not being safe to stay with.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You don’t know what a gentle lot we are:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wouldn’t hurt a hen! You ought to see us</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moving a flock of hens from place to place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re not allowed to take them upside down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All we can hold together by the legs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two at a time’s the rule, one on each arm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No matter how far and how many times</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have to go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“You mean that’s John’s idea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And we live up to it; or I don’t know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What childishness he wouldn’t give way to.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He manages to keep the upper hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his own farm. He’s boss. But as to hens:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We fence our flowers in and the hens range.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing’s too good for them. We say it pays.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John likes to tell the offers he has had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty for this cock, twenty-five for that.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never takes the money. If they’re worth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That much to sell, they’re worth as much to keep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bless you, it’s all expense, though. Reach me down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The little tin box on the cupboard shelf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The upper shelf, the tin box. That’s the one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll show you. Here you are.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="center">
				<span>“What’s this?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A bill⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For fifty dollars for one Langshang cock⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Receipted. And the cock is in the yard.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Not in a glass case, then?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“He’d need a tall one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can eat off a barrel from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s been in a glass case, as you may say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Crystal Palace, London. He’s imported.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John bought him, and we paid the bill with beads⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wampum, I call it. Mind, we don’t complain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you see, don’t you, we take care of him.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And like it, too. It makes it all the worse.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It seems as if. And that’s not all: he’s helpless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ways that I can hardly tell you of.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes he gets possessed to keep accounts</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see where all the money goes so fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know how men will be ridiculous.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it’s just fun the way he gets bedeviled⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he’s untidy now, what will he be⁠—?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It makes it all the worse. You must be blind.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Estelle’s the one. You needn’t talk to me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Can’t you and I get to the root of it?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What’s the real trouble? What will satisfy her?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s as I say: she’s turned from him, that’s all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But why, when she’s well off? Is it the neighbours,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Being cut off from friends?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“We have our friends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That isn’t it. Folks aren’t afraid of us.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“She’s let it worry her. You stood the strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you’re her mother.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“But I didn’t always.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I didn’t relish it along at first.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I got wonted to it. And besides⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John said I was too old to have grandchildren.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what’s the use of talking when it’s done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She won’t come back⁠—it’s worse than that⁠—she can’t.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Why do you speak like that? What do you know?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you mean?⁠—she’s done harm to herself?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I mean she’s married⁠—married someone else.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oho, oho!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="center">
				<span>“You don’t believe me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, I do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only too well. I knew there must be something!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that was what was back. She’s bad, that’s all!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bad to get married when she had the chance?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nonsense! See what’s she done! But who, who⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who’d marry her straight out of such a mess?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say it right out⁠—no matter for her mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man was found. I’d better name no names.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John himself won’t imagine who he is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then it’s all up. I think I’ll get away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ll be expecting John. I pity Estelle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I suppose she deserves some pity, too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ought to have the kitchen to yourself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To break it to him. You may have the job.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You needn’t think you’re going to get away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>John’s almost here. I’ve had my eye on someone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming down Ryan’s Hill. I thought ’tis him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here he is now. This box! Put it away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this bill.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“What’s the hurry? He’ll unhitch.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“No, he won’t, either. He’ll just drop the reins</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn Doll out to pasture, rig and all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She won’t get far before the wheels hang up</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On something⁠—there’s no harm. See, there he is!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My, but he looks as if he must have heard!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>
					<i>John threw the door wide but he didn’t enter.</i>
				</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How are you, neighbour? Just the man I’m after.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isn’t it Hell,” <i>he said.</i> “I want to know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come out here if you want to hear me talk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll talk to you, old woman, afterward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve got some news that maybe isn’t news.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What are they trying to do to me, these two?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Do go along with him and stop his shouting.”</span>
				<br/>
				<i>She raised her voice against the closing door:</i>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who wants to hear your news, you⁠—dreadful fool?”</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-fear" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fear</h2>
			<p>
				<span>A lantern light from deeper in the barn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shone on a man and woman in the door</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threw their lurching shadows on a house</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near by, all dark in every glossy window.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A horse’s hoof pawed once the hollow floor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the back of the gig they stood beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved in a little. The man grasped a wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The woman spoke out sharply, “Whoa, stand still!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I saw it just as plain as a white plate,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said, “as the light on the dashboard ran</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Along the bushes at the roadside⁠—a man’s face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You <em>must</em> have seen it too.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I didn’t see it.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Are you sure⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, I’m sure!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“⁠—it was a face?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Joel, I’ll have to look. I can’t go in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t, and leave a thing like that unsettled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doors locked and curtains drawn will make no difference.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I always have felt strange when we came home</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dark house after so long an absence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the key rattled loudly into place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seemed to warn someone to be getting out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At one door as we entered at another.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What if I’m right, and someone all the time⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t hold my arm!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I say it’s someone passing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You speak as if this were a travelled road.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You forget where we are. What is beyond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he’d be going to or coming from</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At such an hour of night, and on foot too.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What was he standing still for in the bushes?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s not so very late⁠—it’s only dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There’s more in it than you’re inclined to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did he look like⁠—?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“He looked like anyone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll never rest to-night unless I know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me the lantern.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“You don’t want the lantern.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She pushed past him and got it for herself.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’re not to come,” she said. “This is my business.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the time’s come to face it, I’m the one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put it the right way. He’d never dare⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen! He kicked a stone. Hear that, hear that!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s coming towards us. Joel, <em>go</em> in⁠—please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hark!⁠—I don’t hear him now. But please go in.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“In the first place you can’t make me believe it’s⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It is⁠—or someone else he’s sent to watch.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now’s the time to have it out with him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While we know definitely where he is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him get off and he’ll be everywhere</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around us, looking out of trees and bushes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I sha’n’t dare to set a foot outdoors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I can’t stand it. Joel, let me go!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But it’s nonsense to think he’d care enough.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You mean you couldn’t understand his caring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, but you see he hadn’t had enough⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joel, I won’t⁠—I won’t⁠—I promise you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We mustn’t say hard things. You mustn’t either.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’ll be the one, if anybody goes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you give him the advantage with this light.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What couldn’t he do to us standing here!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if to see was what he wanted, why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has seen all there was to see and gone.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He appeared to forget to keep his hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But advanced with her as she crossed the grass.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What do you want?” she cried to all the dark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stretched up tall to overlook the light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hung in both hands hot against her skirt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There’s no one; so you’re wrong,” he said.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“There is.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you want?” she cried, and then herself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was startled when an answer really came.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nothing.” It came from well along the road.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>She reached a hand to Joel for support:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smell of scorching woollen made her faint.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What are you doing round this house at night?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nothing.” A pause: there seemed no more to say.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And then the voice again: “You seem afraid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw by the way you whipped up the horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll just come forward in the lantern light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let you see.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, do.⁠—Joel, go back!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She stood her ground against the noisy steps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That came on, but her body rocked a little.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You see,” the voice said.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Oh.” She looked and looked.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You don’t see⁠—I’ve a child here by the hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What’s a child doing at this time of night⁠—?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Out walking. Every child should have the memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of at least one long-after-bedtime walk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What, son?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Then I should think you’d try to find</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhere to walk⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“The highway as it happens⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re stopping for the fortnight down at Dean’s.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“But if that’s all⁠—Joel⁠—you realize⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You won’t think anything. You understand?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You understand that we have to be careful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a very, very lonely place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joel!” She spoke as if she couldn’t turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The swinging lantern lengthened to the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It touched, it struck it, clattered and went out.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-self-seeker" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Self-Seeker</h2>
			<p>
				<span>“Willis, I didn’t want you here today:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawyer’s coming for the company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m going to sell my soul, or, rather, feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five hundred dollars for the pair, you know.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With you the feet have nearly been the soul;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you’re going to sell them to the devil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I want to see you do it. When’s he coming?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I half suspect you knew, and came on purpose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To try to help me drive a better bargain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well, if it’s true! Yours are no common feet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawyer don’t know what it is he’s buying:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many miles you might have walked you won’t walk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You haven’t run your forty orchids down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What does he think?⁠—How <em>are</em> the blessed feet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doctor’s sure you’re going to walk again?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“He thinks I’ll hobble. It’s both legs and feet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They must be terrible⁠—I mean to look at.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I haven’t dared to look at them uncovered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the bed blankets I remind myself</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a starfish laid out with rigid points.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The wonder is it hadn’t been your head.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It’s hard to tell you how I managed it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I saw the shaft had me by the coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I didn’t try too long to pull away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or fumble for my knife to cut away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I just embraced the shaft and rode it out⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Weiss shut off the water in the wheel-pit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s how I think I didn’t lose my head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my legs got their knocks against the ceiling.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Awful. Why didn’t they throw off the belt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of going clear down in the wheel-pit?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“They say some time was wasted on the belt⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old streak of leather⁠—doesn’t love me much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because I make him spit fire at my knuckles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The way Ben Franklin used to make the kite-string.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That must be it. Some days he won’t stay on.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That day a woman couldn’t coax him off.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s on his rounds now with his tail in his mouth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatched right and left across the silver pulleys.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything goes the same without me there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You can hear the small buzz saws whine, the big saw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caterwaul to the hills around the village</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they both bite the wood. It’s all our music.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One ought as a good villager to like it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No doubt it has a sort of prosperous sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it’s our life.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes, when it’s not our death.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You make that sound as if it wasn’t so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With everything. What we live by we die by.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wonder where my lawyer is. His train’s in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I want this over with; I’m hot and tired.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’re getting ready to do something foolish.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Watch for him, will you, Will? You let him in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’d rather <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin didn’t know;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ve boarded here so long, she thinks she owns me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re bad enough to manage without her.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And I’m going to be worse instead of better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’ve got to tell me how far this is gone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have you agreed to any price?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Five hundred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five hundred⁠—five⁠—five! One, two, three, four, five.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You needn’t look at me.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“I don’t believe you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I told you, Willis, when you first came in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t you be hard on me. I have to take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I can get. You see they have the feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which gives them the advantage in the trade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can’t get back the feet in any case.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But your flowers, man, you’re selling out your flowers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, that’s one way to put it⁠—all the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every kind everywhere in this region</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the next forty summers⁠—call it forty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’m not selling those, I’m giving them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They never earned me so much as one cent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Money can’t pay me for the loss of them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, the five hundred was the sum they named</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pay the doctor’s bill and tide me over.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s that or fight, and I don’t want to fight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I just want to get settled in my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as it’s going to be, and know the worst,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or best⁠—it may not be so bad. The firm</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promise me all the shooks I want to nail.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But what about your flora of the valley?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You have me there. But that⁠—you didn’t think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was worth money to me? Still I own</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It goes against me not to finish it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the friends it might bring me. By the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had a letter from Burroughs⁠—did I tell you?⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About my <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Cyprepedium reginæ</i>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He says it’s not reported so far north.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There! there’s the bell. He’s rung. But you go down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bring him up, and don’t let <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corbin.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh, well, we’ll soon be through with it. I’m tired.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Willis brought up besides the Boston lawyer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A little barefoot girl who in the noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heavy footsteps in the old frame house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And baritone importance of the lawyer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood for a while unnoticed with her hands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shyly behind her.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Well, and how is Mister⁠—”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawyer was already in his satchel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if for papers that might bear the name</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hadn’t at command. “You must excuse me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dropped in at the mill and was detained.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Looking round, I suppose,” said Willis.</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Yes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well, yes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Hear anything that might prove useful?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Broken One saw Anne. “Why, here is Anne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you want, dear? Come, stand by the bed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me what is it?” Anne just wagged her dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With both hands held behind her. “Guess,” she said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Oh, guess which hand? My my! Once on a time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew a lovely way to tell for certain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By looking in the ears. But I forget it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Er, let me see. I think I’ll take the right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That’s sure to be right even if it’s wrong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, hold it out. Don’t change.⁠—A Ram’s Horn orchid!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Ram’s Horn! What would I have got, I wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I had chosen left. Hold out the left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another Ram’s Horn! Where did you find those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under what beech tree, on what woodchuck’s knoll?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anne looked at the large lawyer at her side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought she wouldn’t venture on so much.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Were there no others?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“There were four or five.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew you wouldn’t let me pick them all.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wouldn’t⁠—so I wouldn’t. You’re the girl!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You see Anne has her lesson learned by heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I wanted there should be some there next year.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Of course you did. You left the rest for seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for the backwoods woodchuck. You’re the girl!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Ram’s Horn orchid seedpod for a woodchuck</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounds something like. Better than farmer’s beans</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a discriminating appetite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the Ram’s Horn is seldom to be had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bushel lots⁠—doesn’t come on the market.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, Anne, I’m troubled; have you told me all?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You’re hiding something. That’s as bad as lying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You ask this lawyer man. And it’s not safe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a lawyer at hand to find you out.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing is hidden from some people, Anne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You don’t tell me that where you found a Ram’s Horn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You didn’t find a Yellow Lady’s Slipper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What did I tell you? What? I’d blush, I would.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t you defend yourself. If it was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where is it now, the Yellow Lady’s Slipper?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well, wait⁠—it’s common⁠—it’s too <em>common</em>.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“Common?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Purple Lady’s Slipper’s commoner.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I didn’t bring a Purple Lady’s Slipper</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To <em>You</em>⁠—to you I mean⁠—they’re both too common.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lawyer gave a laugh among his papers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if with some idea that she had scored.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I’ve broken Anne of gathering bouquets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It’s not fair to the child. It can’t be helped though:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pressed into service means pressed out of shape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somehow I’ll make it right with her⁠—she’ll see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She’s going to do my scouting in the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over stone walls and all along a wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by a river bank for water flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The floating Heart, with small leaf like a heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the <em>sinus</em> under water a fist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of little fingers all kept down but one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that thrust up to blossom in the sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if to say, ‘You! You’re the Heart’s desire.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anne has a way with flowers to take the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that she’s lost: she goes down on one knee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifts their faces by the chin to hers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And says their names, and leaves them where they are.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lawyer wore a watch the case of which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was cunningly devised to make a noise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a small pistol when he snapped it shut</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At such a time as this. He snapped it now.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Well, Anne, go, dearie. Our affair will wait.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawyer man is thinking of his train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wants to give me lots and lots of money</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before he goes, because I hurt myself,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it may take him I don’t know how long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But put our flowers in water first. Will, help her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pitcher’s too full for her. There’s no cup?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just hook them on the inside of the pitcher.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now run.⁠—Get out your documents! You see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have to keep on the good side of Anne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m a great boy to think of number one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you can’t blame me in the place I’m in.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will take care of my necessities</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless I do?”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“A pretty interlude,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lawyer said. “I’m sorry, but my train⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Luckily terms are all agreed upon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You only have to sign your name. Right⁠—there.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You, Will, stop making faces. Come round here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where you can’t make them. What is it you want?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll put you out with Anne. Be good or go.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You don’t mean you will sign that thing unread?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Make yourself useful then, and read it for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Isn’t it something I have seen before?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“You’ll find it is. Let your friend look at it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Yes, but all that takes time, and I’m as much</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In haste to get it over with as you.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But read it, read it. That’s right, draw the curtain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half the time I don’t know what’s troubling me.⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do you say, Will? Don’t you be a fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You! crumpling folkses legal documents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out with it if you’ve any real objection.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Five hundred dollars!”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>“What would you think right?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“A thousand wouldn’t be a cent too much;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You know it, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lawyer. The sin is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accepting anything before he knows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether he’s ever going to walk again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It smells to me like a dishonest trick.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I think⁠—I think⁠—from what I heard today⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw myself⁠—he would be ill-advised⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“What did you hear, for instance?” Willis said.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now the place where the accident occurred⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Broken One was twisted in his bed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is between you two apparently.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I come in is what I want to know.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You stand up to it like a pair of cocks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go outdoors if you want to fight. Spare me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When you come back, I’ll have the papers signed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will pencil do? Then, please, your fountain pen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of you hold my head up from the pillow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Willis flung off the bed. “I wash my hands⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’m no match⁠—no, and don’t pretend to be⁠—”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The lawyer gravely capped his fountain pen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“You’re doing the wise thing: you won’t regret it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We’re very sorry for you.”</span>
			</p>
			<p class="right">
				<span>Willis sneered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who’s <em>we</em>?⁠—some stockholders in Boston?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll go outdoors, by gad, and won’t come back.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Willis, bring Anne back with you when you come.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yes. Thanks for caring. Don’t mind Will: he’s savage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thinks you ought to pay me for my flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You don’t know what I mean about the flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don’t stop to try to now. You’ll miss your train.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good-bye.” He flung his arms around his face.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="the-wood-pile" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wood-Pile</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Out walking in the frozen swamp one grey day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I paused and said, “I will turn back from here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No, I will go on farther⁠—and we shall see.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hard snow held me, save where now and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One foot went down. The view was all in lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight up and down of tall slim trees</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too much alike to mark or name a place by</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So as to say for certain I was here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or somewhere else: I was just far from home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A small bird flew before me. He was careful</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To put a tree between us when he lighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And say no word to tell me who he was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who was so foolish as to think what he thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He thought that I was after him for a feather⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The white one in his tail; like one who takes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything said as personal to himself.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One flight out sideways would have undeceived him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then there was a pile of wood for which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I forgot him and let his little fear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry him off the way I might have gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without so much as wishing him good-night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He went behind it to make his last stand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was a cord of maple, cut and split</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And piled⁠—and measured, four by four by eight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not another like it could I see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No runner tracks in this year’s snow looped near it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it was older sure than this year’s cutting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or even last year’s or the year’s before.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wood was grey and the bark warping off it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pile somewhat sunken. Clematis</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had wound strings round and round it like a bundle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What held it though on one side was a tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still growing, and on one a stake and prop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These latter about to fall. I thought that only</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Someone who lived in turning to fresh tasks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could so forget his handiwork on which</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spent himself, the labour of his axe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leave it there far from a useful fireplace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warm the frozen swamp as best it could</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the slow smokeless burning of decay.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
		<article id="good-hours" epub:type="epilogue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Good Hours</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I had for my winter evening walk⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one at all with whom to talk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I had the cottages in a row</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to their shining eyes in snow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And I thought I had the folk within:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had the sound of a violin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had a glimpse through curtain laces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of youthful forms and youthful faces.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I had such company outward bound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I went till there were no cottages found.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I turned and repented, but coming back</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw no window but that was black.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Over the snow my creaking feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disturbed the slumbering village street</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like profanation, by your leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At ten o’clock of a winter eve.</span>
			</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
